wordle/part-one/README.md, before:

# HTML, CSS, and JS Lab One

In this lab, we're going to be creating a basic version of the [Wordle](https://www.nytimes.com/games/wordle/index.html) game in a local HTML file. In the process, we'll learn more about web development, Chrome's debugging tools, and Visual Studio Code.

## Lab Part One: Create the Wordle HTML

In Part One of this lab, we'll create all the HTML and CSS our Wordle game needs.

### 1) I've created some HTML to get you started, but we need to save it to your computer

1. On your Windows machine, create a working directory for your code:
	- Open the File Explore from the start menu (or hit the Windows key `⊞ Win` > start typing `File explorer` until you see it pop up > hit `Enter`)
	<!-- TODO: is this the right directory? -->
	- Navigate to your Documents directory
	- Create a new folder Right click > `New` > `Folder`.
	- Name the folder `html-lab-one` or something similar so you know where to find this code again
1. Open the folder you just created in VS Code:
	- Open VS Code (`⊞ Win` > start typing `Visual Studio Code` until you see it pop up > hit `Enter`)
	- In the new window, hit the open button

		![Open folder button](images/open-folder-1.png)

	- Navigate to the folder you created in the above step, highlight it, and click `Open`.

		![Open folder find folder and open](images/open-folder-2.png)

	- If a popup appears asking if you trust the authors of this folder, click "Yes I trust the authors"
1. Create a local HTML file:
	- Create a new file by right clicking in the file explorer section on the left side of the window: Right click > `New file...` > type `lab-one.html` as the file name > hit `Enter`

		![Create file from VS Code file explorer](images/create-file-1.png)
		![Name and save file](images/create-file-2.png)

1. Now let's copy the code I'm giving you to start off:
	- Navigate to [this code directory](https://github.com/ianfisk/teaching-materials/tree/main/wordle/part-one) in Chrome and click on the file named `lab-template.html`.
	- Click the `Copy raw file` button near the button that says `Raw`.

		![Copy raw file button](images/copy-raw-button.png)

1. Finally, go back to `lab-one.html` in VS Code and **paste the HTML into the code editor** (`Ctrl + v` to paste), and...
1. **SAVE THE FILE**: `Ctrl + s` or `File` > `Save`

	Before saving
	![File not saved](images/file-not-saved.png)

	After saving
	![File saved](images/file-saved.png)

### 2) Open `lab-one.html` file in Chrome

1. Open a new blank tab in Chrome
1. Navigate to `File` > `Open file...` or hit `Ctrl + o`
1. Navigate to the `lab-one.html` file saved above and click `Open`
	![Opening lab file in Chrome](images/open-lab-file-in-chrome.png)
1. Wahoo! Notice that Chrome is rendering this HTML just like it would any web page received from a remote web server. Loading a local HTML file from disk is an easy way to write HTML without a server. Here is what you should see:
	![Opened wordle lab file](images/opened-wordle.png)

### 3) Explore the HTML I've given you to start off with

Take a moment to look over the HTML we've added to the `lab-one.html` file. This file is incomplete and currently doesn't do anything, but I've gotten you started.

#### Look at the `<head>` section

I've added the `<title>` element
```html
<title>Rocky Wordle</title>
```
which is why the Chrome tab's title is "Rocky Wordle". Feel free to change this value to anything you want, but keep it short so it's readable in Chrome.

You'll also notice a lot of CSS I've added in a `<style>` tag. Some of these styles are being applied right now, but some of them will be applied when we add the missing HTML to complete the game.

Look at the `<script>` tag I've added–notice how this doesn't link to a JavaScript file but instead contains JavaScript statements directly inbetween the tags. I've created the game logic and added it to a JavaScript class: `class Wordle { ... }`. This `Wordle` class is a basic working version of the Wordle game logic, but your HTML is currently missing another script that sets up the game and makes it playable.

> **NOTE:** Your HTML is currently missing another script that uses the `Wordle` class to set up the game and make it playable. We'll be adding the missing script later in the lab.

#### Look at the `<body>` section

I've added some basic structure to divide the page into two sections:
1. The board section
	```html
	<div class="board-container">...</div>
	```
2. The keyboard section
	```html
	<div id="keyboard-container">...</div>
	```

Notice how I've used CSS _classes_ (e.g., `class="board-container"`) and CSS _IDs_ (e.g., `id="keyboard-container"`) to name these sections and apply CSS to them. Do not change these values.

#### Play with the Chrome Debugger

Now right click > `Inspect` to open the Chrome HTML inspector.

In the Elements tab, mouse over the HTML here. Notice how Chrome highlights the elements in the window and if you click on an element, its CSS styles are displayed:
	![HTML and CSS styles in Chrome inspector](images/chrome-inspector-1.png)
	![Margin and padding highlighting](images/chrome-inspector-2.png)

**Just for fun**, try adding a background color to the `board-container` `<div>` using the inspector:
1. Click on the `board-container` `<div>` in the Elements tab of the inspector.
1. Click in the `element.style` section and start typing "background" to get autocomplete suggestions. Hit `Tab` once the suggestion is correct.
	![Adding background style](images/add-background-color-1.png)
1. Next type in the color you want (use `Tab` again to accept autocomplete suggestions)
	![Typing in background color value](images/add-background-color-2.png)
	![Background style applied](images/add-background-color-3.png)
1. Voilà, the board container now has a background color! Since this style is only applied in the Chrome inspector, it will disappear when you refresh the page, but the inspector allows you to easily debug HTML or play with CSS styles before copying them to the file. If you _really_ like your background color, try adding it to the `.board-container` style rule in `lab-one.html` so it won't disappear when you refresh.

### 4) Fix the keyboard by adding missing keys

Do you notice any missing keys from the keyboard I've given you? Right, all the vowels are gone! Let's add them:

1. Go back to VS Code and the `lab-one.html` file open there.
1. Find where the keyboard `<button>` elements are in the HTML. Notice how I've arranged each row of buttons to be contained within a `keyboard-row` `<div>`. This shows one way to logically structure rows and row sub-items in HTML.
1. Locate where to add the first missing button, one for the letter "e":

	![Where e button belongs](images/add-e-button.png)

1. **Follow the pattern of the other buttons** to add a `<button>` element for "e". Save the file!
1. Refresh the page in Chrome to see your added "e" key.
1. Repeat this process for the rest of the missing vowels. At the end of this process, the keyboard on the page should look **exactly** like the keyboard you are typing on in real life (except the `ENTER` and `DEL` keys):

	The finished keyboard:

	![The finished keyboard](images/finished-keyboard.png)

1. Make sure to save your work as you go! (`Ctrl + s` from the code editor or `File` > `Save`)

### 5) Add the missing tile grid

Now we are going to add the missing HTML to make the game grid. We ultimately want our game to look something like this:

![The game grid](images/empty-game-grid.png)

1. Locate the `board` `<div>` in the `lab-one.html` file:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<!-- Step 5: Add the game grid here. -->
	</div>
	...
	```
	Similar to the layout of the keyboard, we're going to add row `<div>`s and then individual tile elements in each row.
1. Add **six** `<div>` elements with `class="tile-row"` as children of the `board` element:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<div class="tile-row"></div>
		<!-- ... six of them total -->
	</div>
	...
	```
	Your board should look like this:

	![Board rows](images/board-rows.png)

1. Save the file, and refresh the page in Chrome. Look at the HTML inspector to see your added rows (currently they have no color, so you will only see them when hovering over them in the inspector). Click on the `board` element and make sure the alignment looks like this:

	![Good board rows](images/board-rows-good.png)

1. Now let's add tile elements to each row. Add **five** `<div>` elements with `class="tile"` as children of each `tile-row` element:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<div class="tile-row">
			<div class="tile"></div>
			<!-- ... five tiles total -->
		</div>
		...
	</div>
	...
	```
	> TIP: Copy/paste is your friend!
	>
	> Copy a `tile` `<div>` by clicking at the end of a line, using `Shift + Home` to highlight the entire line, copy `Ctrl + c`, insert a new line below with `Ctrl + Enter`, and then paste `Ctrl + v`. Repeat. Try to maintain correct tabbing so elements stay aligned. You can move lines left and right using `Ctrl + [` and `Ctrl + ]`, respectively.

	After adding tiles to one row, it should look like this:

	![Row with tiles](images/complete-tile-row.png)

1. Repeat the previous step (copy/paste!) until **every row has five tiles**. Then save and reload the page in Chrome. You should see all six rows of five tiles:

![Complete board](images/completed-board.png)

### 6) Add missing tile style

Do you notice anything funny about our tile styling? In the above screenshot they're kind of a squat rectangle, and if you change the size of your Chrome window the whole board stretches and pulls with the window size. We want the tiles to be square-ish like the real Wordle game.

Let's add some CSS so the tiles have a max width and height. We can accomplish this be putting limits on the max board size using the CSS rules `max-width` and `max-height`.

1. In the `<head>` section of `lab-one.html`, find where the `.board` class is defined. It will look like this:
	```css
	.board {
		display: flex;
		flex: 1;
		flex-direction: column;
	}
	```
	This CSS class corresponds to the `class="board"` attribute on our board `<div>`.

1. Now add these extra rules to constrain the max size of the board: `max-width: 333px;` and `max-height: 400px;`. So in the end, the `.board` CSS will look like:
	```css
	.board {
		display: flex;
		flex: 1;
		flex-direction: column;
		max-height: 400px;
		max-width: 333px;
	}
	```

1. Save the file and reload the page in Chrome, and voilà, our tiles look great! Inspect the `board` element and look at our new CSS:

	![Finalized board](images/final-board.png)


### Part One wrap-up

Now that we're done with part one of this lab, let's think about what we've done:
- We've added some missing `<button>` elements to our game's keyboard
- We've created all the HTML for our grid of game tiles
- We've played around with Chrome's Debugger to inspect our HTML and CSS

Our page looks great, but our game still doesn't do anything! In the next part of the lab, we will add the necessary JavaScript so our game is playable.

****

## Lab Part Two: Add JavaScript so the game is playable

Now that we have written all of our game's HTML, we need to add a little bit of JavaScript so our game is playable. Remember that I've already written a script that contains a `Wordle` class that contains all the game logic, but we need another script that constructs and initializes a `Wordle` game instance after the web page is loaded.

Using code that other people have written in your own code is a very common task when programming. Here you'll practice using this `Wordle` class I've already written for you.

### 1) Add a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener

We almost always want to wait for the DOM ([Document Object Model](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model)) to load before we start interacting with it in JavaScript (add event listeners, change styles, etc.). To do this, we'll use the [`DOMContentLoaded` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/DOMContentLoaded_event). This event fires after the HTML is parsed and the DOM is constructed, so at that point it is safe to work with the DOM in JavaScript.

1. Open `lab-one.html` and add a new `<script>` element that will hold our new JavaScript to the bottom of the `<head>` element:
	```html
	<!DOCTYPE html>
	<html>
	<head>
		...
		<script></script>
	</head>
	```
1. In this new `<script>` element, add a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener that logs something when the event fires:
	```html
	<!DOCTYPE html>
	<html>
	<head>
		...
		<script>
			document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
				console.log('Content loaded!');
			});
		</script>
	</head>
	```
	The `DOMContentLoaded` event is fired on the global `document` object. When calling `addEventListener`, the first argument is the event type (string) and the second argument is the listener (function) that will be called when the event fires. ([See the documentation.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener#syntax)).

1. Save the file and then reload it in Chrome. Open the Debugger (Right click > Inspect), and this time, go to the Console tab. There you should see the `Content loaded!` log!

	![DOM Content Loaded log](images/dom-content-loaded-log.png)

	This log tells us our event listener is working correctly.

### 2) Initialize the `Wordle` game

1. Now we need to construct an instance of the `Wordle` class so our game is playable.
	- To construct instances of a class, we use the `new` keyword in JavaScript. Classes are blueprints for an object instance, which might not make a lot of sense right now and that's ok. You can think of the class as being a cookie-cutter template (e.g., a metal snow man cutter), and cookies made by that cookie-cutter as instances. In code this cookie analogy would look like `const cookie = new SnowManCookieCutter();`. For our web page, the `Wordle` class is the cookie-cutter that can make a Wordle game instance (cookie) for us.

		So, **update the event listener callback function to include the line `const game = new Wordle();`**

		```html
		<script>
			document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
				console.log('Content loaded!');
				const game = new Wordle(); // <--- Add this line.
			});
		</script>
		```
		Save `lab-one.html` and refresh the page in Chrome. What do you see in the console?

1. Ok, so we have an error, some `Uncaught TypeError ...` blah blah blah. Error messages are important to read because they tell you a) what went wrong, and b) where the error occured (e.g., `lab-one.html:110:25` which means line 110 and character 25 in that line). In this case, I'll help you out with the error so we won't look too closely at the message. The `Wordle` class expects to receive several _arguments_ when a new instance is being constructed, so we need to pass those arguments when we call `new Wordle()`. Like this:

	```html
	<script>
		document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
			console.log('Content loaded!');
			const game = new Wordle({
				superSecretWord: 'earth',
				keyboardButtons: document.getElementById('keyboard-container').querySelectorAll('button'),
				tileElements: document.querySelectorAll('.tile'),
			});
		});
	</script>
	```
	Let's look closer at these arguments:
	- `superSecretWord`, as you can probably guess, is the super secret word of the day for our game. If the user types in this word, they will win the game.
	- `keyboardButtons` is a list of all the `<button>` elements we've added to our page's keyboard. `document.getElementById(...).querySelectorAll('button')` is used to retrieve a list of all the button elements in the keyboard.
	- Similarly, `tileElements` is a list of all the tile `<div>` elements we've added in our game's board.

1. Save `lab-one.html` and reload the page in Chrome again. What do you see in the console? Nice, no errors! But the game still isn't doing anything when I click on keyboard buttons or type on my actual keyboard. We're missing one more piece...
1. The `Wordle` game object isn't quite ready to control the game after being constructed. We also need to call the `initialize` method so... well... it can initialize itself. After that, the game should be playable. Add the line `game.initialize();` to the script.

	Your final script should look like:

	```html
	<script>
		document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
			console.log('Content loaded!');
			const game = new Wordle({
				superSecretWord: 'earth',
				keyboardButtons: document.getElementById('keyboard-container').querySelectorAll('button'),
				tileElements: document.querySelectorAll('.tile'),
			});
			game.initialize(); // <--- Add this line.
		});
	</script>
	```
1. Save `lab-one.html` and reload the page in Chrome again. What do you see in the console? Nice, now we see `Wordle game is ready!`. Try clicking on some keyboard buttons. Do you see the characters appear in the grid? How about if you type on your keyboard? After filling up a row with your guess, click enter on the page's keyboard or hit it on your real keyboard. How was your guess? Try typing in the super secret word, `earth`, what happens?

### 3) Part Two wrap-up

Now that we're done with part two of this lab, our version of Wordle is playable! Yes there are some differences in behavior, but it is pretty similar. Let's review what we did in part two of the lab:
- We've added another script that adds a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener
- We've created a `Wordle` game instance
- We've `initialize`d our game instance so it's playable

At this point, the lab is done. If you want add more functionality to your Wordle game, see the Extension section below.

******


# Tips and Tricks

- Utilize VS Code's keyboard shortcuts. See them here: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/keybindings
	- **Copy/paste**: Copy line by moving the cursor to the end with the `End` key, then using `Shift + Home` to highlight the entire line, copy `Ctrl + c`, insert a new line below with `Ctrl + Enter`, and then paste `Ctrl + v`. Repeat.
	- **Tabbing**: You can move lines left and right using `Ctrl + [` and `Ctrl + ]`, respectively. Maintaining correct tabbing in HTML is critical for readability. Keep sibling elements aligned, and indent children elements by one relative their parent element.
	- **Selecting text**: Holding `Shift` while moving the cursor (with the arrow keys, `Home`/`End`, etc.) will highlight the text/lines the cursor is moving over. Then you can copy/paste the selected text or do other magical editor things.
- Toggle `Disable Cache` in the Chrome Debugger's Network tab so files are always refreshed when you reload a page.

	![Disable cache](images/disable-cache.png)

- Save your work **frequently**: `Ctrl + S` in the code editor

# Extensions



<!-- #### Extensions

- Add a header component to your page
	- Add your name to the header
	- Add a link to RMHS home page
	- Add CSS animations to the grid -->

Commit message:

Add extensions to wordle lab.

wordle/part-one/README.md, after:

# HTML, CSS, and JS Lab One

In this lab, we're going to be creating a basic version of the [Wordle](https://www.nytimes.com/games/wordle/index.html) game in a local HTML file. In the process, we'll learn more about web development, Chrome's debugging tools, and Visual Studio Code.

## Lab Part One: Create the Wordle HTML

In Part One of this lab, we'll create all the HTML and CSS our Wordle game needs.

### 1) I've created some HTML to get you started, but we need to save it to your computer

1. On your Windows machine, create a working directory for your code:
	- Open the File Explore from the start menu (or hit the Windows key `⊞ Win` > start typing `File explorer` until you see it pop up > hit `Enter`)
	<!-- TODO: is this the right directory? -->
	- Navigate to your Documents directory
	- Create a new folder Right click > `New` > `Folder`.
	- Name the folder `html-lab-one` or something similar so you know where to find this code again
1. Open the folder you just created in VS Code:
	- Open VS Code (`⊞ Win` > start typing `Visual Studio Code` until you see it pop up > hit `Enter`)
	- In the new window, hit the open button

		![Open folder button](images/open-folder-1.png)

	- Navigate to the folder you created in the above step, highlight it, and click `Open`.

		![Open folder find folder and open](images/open-folder-2.png)

	- If a popup appears asking if you trust the authors of this folder, click "Yes I trust the authors"
1. Create a local HTML file:
	- Create a new file by right clicking in the file explorer section on the left side of the window: Right click > `New file...` > type `lab-one.html` as the file name > hit `Enter`

		![Create file from VS Code file explorer](images/create-file-1.png)
		![Name and save file](images/create-file-2.png)

1. Now let's copy the code I'm giving you to start off:
	- Navigate to [this code directory](https://github.com/ianfisk/teaching-materials/tree/main/wordle/part-one) in Chrome and click on the file named `lab-template.html`.
	- Click the `Copy raw file` button near the button that says `Raw`.

		![Copy raw file button](images/copy-raw-button.png)

1. Finally, go back to `lab-one.html` in VS Code and **paste the HTML into the code editor** (`Ctrl + v` to paste), and...
1. **SAVE THE FILE**: `Ctrl + s` or `File` > `Save`

	Before saving
	![File not saved](images/file-not-saved.png)

	After saving
	![File saved](images/file-saved.png)

### 2) Open `lab-one.html` file in Chrome

1. Open a new blank tab in Chrome
1. Navigate to `File` > `Open file...` or hit `Ctrl + o`
1. Navigate to the `lab-one.html` file saved above and click `Open`
	![Opening lab file in Chrome](images/open-lab-file-in-chrome.png)
1. Wahoo! Notice that Chrome is rendering this HTML just like it would any web page received from a remote web server. Loading a local HTML file from disk is an easy way to write HTML without a server. Here is what you should see:
	![Opened wordle lab file](images/opened-wordle.png)

### 3) Explore the HTML I've given you to start off with

Take a moment to look over the HTML we've added to the `lab-one.html` file. This file is incomplete and currently doesn't do anything, but I've gotten you started.

#### Look at the `<head>` section

I've added the `<title>` element
```html
<title>Rocky Wordle</title>
```
which is why the Chrome tab's title is "Rocky Wordle". Feel free to change this value to anything you want, but keep it short so it's readable in Chrome.

You'll also notice a lot of CSS I've added in a `<style>` tag. Some of these styles are being applied right now, but some of them will be applied when we add the missing HTML to complete the game.

Look at the `<script>` tag I've added–notice how this doesn't link to a JavaScript file but instead contains JavaScript statements directly inbetween the tags. I've created the game logic and added it to a JavaScript class: `class Wordle { ... }`. This `Wordle` class is a basic working version of the Wordle game logic, but your HTML is currently missing another script that sets up the game and makes it playable.

> **NOTE:** Your HTML is currently missing another script that uses the `Wordle` class to set up the game and make it playable. We'll be adding the missing script later in the lab.

#### Look at the `<body>` section

I've added some basic structure to divide the page into two sections:
1. The board section
	```html
	<div class="board-container">...</div>
	```
2. The keyboard section
	```html
	<div id="keyboard-container">...</div>
	```

Notice how I've used CSS _classes_ (e.g., `class="board-container"`) and CSS _IDs_ (e.g., `id="keyboard-container"`) to name these sections and apply CSS to them. Do not change these values.

#### Play with the Chrome Debugger

Now right click > `Inspect` to open the Chrome HTML inspector.

In the Elements tab, mouse over the HTML here. Notice how Chrome highlights the elements in the window and if you click on an element, its CSS styles are displayed:
	![HTML and CSS styles in Chrome inspector](images/chrome-inspector-1.png)
	![Margin and padding highlighting](images/chrome-inspector-2.png)

**Just for fun**, try adding a background color to the `board-container` `<div>` using the inspector:
1. Click on the `board-container` `<div>` in the Elements tab of the inspector.
1. Click in the `element.style` section and start typing "background" to get autocomplete suggestions. Hit `Tab` once the suggestion is correct.
	![Adding background style](images/add-background-color-1.png)
1. Next type in the color you want (use `Tab` again to accept autocomplete suggestions)
	![Typing in background color value](images/add-background-color-2.png)
	![Background style applied](images/add-background-color-3.png)
1. Voilà, the board container now has a background color! Since this style is only applied in the Chrome inspector, it will disappear when you refresh the page, but the inspector allows you to easily debug HTML or play with CSS styles before copying them to the file. If you _really_ like your background color, try adding it to the `.board-container` style rule in `lab-one.html` so it won't disappear when you refresh.

### 4) Fix the keyboard by adding missing keys

Do you notice any missing keys from the keyboard I've given you? Right, all the vowels are gone! Let's add them:

1. Go back to VS Code and the `lab-one.html` file open there.
1. Find where the keyboard `<button>` elements are in the HTML. Notice how I've arranged each row of buttons to be contained within a `keyboard-row` `<div>`. This shows one way to logically structure rows and row sub-items in HTML.
1. Locate where to add the first missing button, one for the letter "e":

	![Where e button belongs](images/add-e-button.png)

1. **Follow the pattern of the other buttons** to add a `<button>` element for "e". Save the file!
1. Refresh the page in Chrome to see your added "e" key.
1. Repeat this process for the rest of the missing vowels. At the end of this process, the keyboard on the page should look **exactly** like the keyboard you are typing on in real life (except the `ENTER` and `DEL` keys):

	The finished keyboard:

	![The finished keyboard](images/finished-keyboard.png)

1. Make sure to save your work as you go! (`Ctrl + s` from the code editor or `File` > `Save`)

### 5) Add the missing tile grid

Now we are going to add the missing HTML to make the game grid. We ultimately want our game to look something like this:

![The game grid](images/empty-game-grid.png)

1. Locate the `board` `<div>` in the `lab-one.html` file:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<!-- Step 5: Add the game grid here. -->
	</div>
	...
	```
	Similar to the layout of the keyboard, we're going to add row `<div>`s and then individual tile elements in each row.
1. Add **six** `<div>` elements with `class="tile-row"` as children of the `board` element:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<div class="tile-row"></div>
		<!-- ... six of them total -->
	</div>
	...
	```
	Your board should look like this:

	![Board rows](images/board-rows.png)

1. Save the file, and refresh the page in Chrome. Look at the HTML inspector to see your added rows (currently they have no color, so you will only see them when hovering over them in the inspector). Click on the `board` element and make sure the alignment looks like this:

	![Good board rows](images/board-rows-good.png)

1. Now let's add tile elements to each row. Add **five** `<div>` elements with `class="tile"` as children of each `tile-row` element:
	```html
	...
	<div class="board">
		<div class="tile-row">
			<div class="tile"></div>
			<!-- ... five tiles total -->
		</div>
		...
	</div>
	...
	```
	> TIP: Copy/paste is your friend!
	>
	> Copy a `tile` `<div>` by clicking at the end of a line, using `Shift + Home` to highlight the entire line, copy `Ctrl + c`, insert a new line below with `Ctrl + Enter`, and then paste `Ctrl + v`. Repeat. Try to maintain correct tabbing so elements stay aligned. You can move lines left and right using `Ctrl + [` and `Ctrl + ]`, respectively.

	After adding tiles to one row, it should look like this:

	![Row with tiles](images/complete-tile-row.png)

1. Repeat the previous step (copy/paste!) until **every row has five tiles**. Then save and reload the page in Chrome. You should see all six rows of five tiles:

![Complete board](images/completed-board.png)

### 6) Add missing tile style

Do you notice anything funny about our tile styling? In the above screenshot they're kind of a squat rectangle, and if you change the size of your Chrome window the whole board stretches and pulls with the window size. We want the tiles to be square-ish like the real Wordle game.

Let's add some CSS so the tiles have a max width and height. We can accomplish this be putting limits on the max board size using the CSS rules `max-width` and `max-height`.

1. In the `<head>` section of `lab-one.html`, find where the `.board` class is defined. It will look like this:
	```css
	.board {
		display: flex;
		flex: 1;
		flex-direction: column;
	}
	```
	This CSS class corresponds to the `class="board"` attribute on our board `<div>`.

1. Now add these extra rules to constrain the max size of the board: `max-width: 333px;` and `max-height: 400px;`. So in the end, the `.board` CSS will look like:
	```css
	.board {
		display: flex;
		flex: 1;
		flex-direction: column;
		max-height: 400px;
		max-width: 333px;
	}
	```

1. Save the file and reload the page in Chrome, and voilà, our tiles look great! Inspect the `board` element and look at our new CSS:

	![Finalized board](images/final-board.png)


### Part One wrap-up

Now that we're done with part one of this lab, let's think about what we've done:
- We've added some missing `<button>` elements to our game's keyboard
- We've created all the HTML for our grid of game tiles
- We've played around with Chrome's Debugger to inspect our HTML and CSS

Our page looks great, but our game still doesn't do anything! In the next part of the lab, we will add the necessary JavaScript so our game is playable.

****

## Lab Part Two: Add JavaScript so the game is playable

Now that we have written all of our game's HTML, we need to add a little bit of JavaScript so our game is playable. Remember that I've already written a script that contains a `Wordle` class that contains all the game logic, but we need another script that constructs and initializes a `Wordle` game instance after the web page is loaded.

Using code that other people have written in your own code is a very common task when programming. Here you'll practice using this `Wordle` class I've already written for you.

### 1) Add a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener

We almost always want to wait for the DOM ([Document Object Model](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model)) to load before we start interacting with it in JavaScript (add event listeners, change styles, etc.). To do this, we'll use the [`DOMContentLoaded` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/DOMContentLoaded_event). This event fires after the HTML is parsed and the DOM is constructed, so at that point it is safe to work with the DOM in JavaScript.

1. Open `lab-one.html` and add a new `<script>` element that will hold our new JavaScript to the bottom of the `<head>` element:
	```html
	<!DOCTYPE html>
	<html>
	<head>
		...
		<script></script>
	</head>
	```
1. In this new `<script>` element, add a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener that logs something when the event fires:
	```html
	<!DOCTYPE html>
	<html>
	<head>
		...
		<script>
			document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
				console.log('Content loaded!');
			});
		</script>
	</head>
	```
	The `DOMContentLoaded` event is fired on the global `document` object. When calling `addEventListener`, the first argument is the event type (string) and the second argument is the listener (function) that will be called when the event fires. ([See the documentation.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventTarget/addEventListener#syntax)).

1. Save the file and then reload it in Chrome. Open the Debugger (Right click > Inspect), and this time, go to the Console tab. There you should see the `Content loaded!` log!

	![DOM Content Loaded log](images/dom-content-loaded-log.png)

	This log tells us our event listener is working correctly.

### 2) Initialize the `Wordle` game

1. Now we need to construct an instance of the `Wordle` class so our game is playable.
	- To construct instances of a class, we use the `new` keyword in JavaScript. Classes are blueprints for an object instance, which might not make a lot of sense right now and that's ok. You can think of the class as being a cookie-cutter template (e.g., a metal snow man cutter), and cookies made by that cookie-cutter as instances. In code this cookie analogy would look like `const cookie = new SnowManCookieCutter();`. For our web page, the `Wordle` class is the cookie-cutter that can make a Wordle game instance (cookie) for us.

		So, **update the event listener callback function to include the line `const game = new Wordle();`**

		```html
		<script>
			document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
				console.log('Content loaded!');
				const game = new Wordle(); // <--- Add this line.
			});
		</script>
		```
		Save `lab-one.html` and refresh the page in Chrome. What do you see in the console?

1. Ok, so we have an error, some `Uncaught TypeError ...` blah blah blah. Error messages are important to read because they tell you a) what went wrong, and b) where the error occured (e.g., `lab-one.html:110:25` which means line 110 and character 25 in that line). In this case, I'll help you out with the error so we won't look too closely at the message. The `Wordle` class expects to receive several _arguments_ when a new instance is being constructed, so we need to pass those arguments when we call `new Wordle()`. Like this:

	```html
	<script>
		document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
			console.log('Content loaded!');
			const game = new Wordle({
				superSecretWord: 'earth',
				keyboardButtons: document.getElementById('keyboard-container').querySelectorAll('button'),
				tileElements: document.querySelectorAll('.tile'),
			});
		});
	</script>
	```
	Let's look closer at these arguments:
	- `superSecretWord`, as you can probably guess, is the super secret word of the day for our game. If the user types in this word, they will win the game.
	- `keyboardButtons` is a list of all the `<button>` elements we've added to our page's keyboard. `document.getElementById(...).querySelectorAll('button')` is used to retrieve a list of all the button elements in the keyboard.
	- Similarly, `tileElements` is a list of all the tile `<div>` elements we've added in our game's board.

1. Save `lab-one.html` and reload the page in Chrome again. What do you see in the console? Nice, no errors! But the game still isn't doing anything when I click on keyboard buttons or type on my actual keyboard. We're missing one more piece...
1. The `Wordle` game object isn't quite ready to control the game after being constructed. We also need to call the `initialize` method so... well... it can initialize itself. After that, the game should be playable. Add the line `game.initialize();` to the script.

	Your final script should look like:

	```html
	<script>
		document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
			console.log('Content loaded!');
			const game = new Wordle({
				superSecretWord: 'earth',
				keyboardButtons: document.getElementById('keyboard-container').querySelectorAll('button'),
				tileElements: document.querySelectorAll('.tile'),
			});
			game.initialize(); // <--- Add this line.
		});
	</script>
	```
1. Save `lab-one.html` and reload the page in Chrome again. What do you see in the console? Nice, now we see `Wordle game is ready!`. Try clicking on some keyboard buttons. Do you see the characters appear in the grid? How about if you type on your keyboard? After filling up a row with your guess, click enter on the page's keyboard or hit it on your real keyboard. How was your guess? Try typing in the super secret word, `earth`, what happens?

### 3) Part Two wrap-up

Now that we're done with part two of this lab, our version of Wordle is playable! Yes there are some differences in behavior, but it is pretty similar. Let's review what we did in part two of the lab:
- We've added another script that adds a `DOMContentLoaded` event listener
- We've created a `Wordle` game instance
- We've `initialize`d our game instance so it's playable

At this point, the lab is done. If you want add more functionality to your Wordle game, see the Extension section below.

******


# Tips and Tricks

- Utilize VS Code's keyboard shortcuts. See them here: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/keybindings
	- **Copy/paste**: Copy line by moving the cursor to the end with the `End` key, then using `Shift + Home` to highlight the entire line, copy `Ctrl + c`, insert a new line below with `Ctrl + Enter`, and then paste `Ctrl + v`. Repeat.
	- **Tabbing**: You can move lines left and right using `Ctrl + [` and `Ctrl + ]`, respectively. Maintaining correct tabbing in HTML is critical for readability. Keep sibling elements aligned, and indent children elements by one relative their parent element.
	- **Selecting text**: Holding `Shift` while moving the cursor (with the arrow keys, `Home`/`End`, etc.) will highlight the text/lines the cursor is moving over. Then you can copy/paste the selected text or do other magical editor things.
- Toggle `Disable Cache` in the Chrome Debugger's Network tab so files are always refreshed when you reload a page.

	![Disable cache](images/disable-cache.png)

- Save your work **frequently**: `Ctrl + S` in the code editor

# Extensions

## Add a title bar to the page

The real Wordle game has a title bar that spans the top of the page. Add something similar to your page, and customize it by adding your name to it and a hyperlink ([`<a>` tag](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/a)) to the RMHS home page.

## Check user's word is in the dictionary before accepting it as input

Currently our game doesn't check that the user types a real word before checking a row's letters. If you want to add this dictionary check, copy the JavaScript dictionary in [this file](https://github.com/ianfisk/teaching-materials/blob/main/wordle/part-one/dictionary-extension.js) and see if you can update the `Wordle` class to check this dictionary when checking a row.
